# University Management System
# Demonstrates complex academic relationships and hierarchies

TABLE students
  id BIGINT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT
  student_number VARCHAR(20) UNIQUE NOT NULL
  first_name VARCHAR(100) NOT NULL
  last_name VARCHAR(100) NOT NULL
  email VARCHAR(255) UNIQUE NOT NULL
  phone VARCHAR(20)
  date_of_birth DATE NOT NULL
  gender ENUM('male', 'female', 'other')
  address TEXT
  emergency_contact_name VARCHAR(200)
  emergency_contact_phone VARCHAR(20)
  enrollment_date DATE NOT NULL
  graduation_date DATE
  gpa DECIMAL(3,2) DEFAULT 0.00
  total_credits INT DEFAULT 0
  status ENUM('active', 'inactive', 'graduated', 'suspended') DEFAULT 'active'
  major_id BIGINT NOT NULL FK
  advisor_id BIGINT FK
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP

TABLE faculty
  id BIGINT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT
  employee_id VARCHAR(20) UNIQUE NOT NULL
  first_name VARCHAR(100) NOT NULL
  last_name VARCHAR(100) NOT NULL
  email VARCHAR(255) UNIQUE NOT NULL
  phone VARCHAR(20)
  office_location VARCHAR(100)
  title VARCHAR(100)
  rank ENUM('instructor', 'assistant_professor', 'associate_professor', 'professor', 'emeritus')
  department_id BIGINT NOT NULL FK
  hire_date DATE NOT NULL
  salary DECIMAL(10,2)
  is_active BOOLEAN DEFAULT true
  research_interests TEXT
  office_hours VARCHAR(500)
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP

TABLE departments
  id BIGINT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT
  name VARCHAR(100) UNIQUE NOT NULL
  code VARCHAR(10) UNIQUE NOT NULL
  description TEXT
  head_id BIGINT FK
  college_id BIGINT NOT NULL FK
  budget DECIMAL(12,2)
  office_location VARCHAR(100)
  phone VARCHAR(20)
  email VARCHAR(255)
  website_url VARCHAR(255)
  established_year YEAR
  is_active BOOLEAN DEFAULT true
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP

TABLE colleges
  id BIGINT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT
  name VARCHAR(100) UNIQUE NOT NULL
  code VARCHAR(10) UNIQUE NOT NULL
  description TEXT
  dean_id BIGINT FK
  budget DECIMAL(15,2)
  building VARCHAR(100)
  phone VARCHAR(20)
  email VARCHAR(255)
  website_url VARCHAR(255)
  established_year YEAR
  is_active BOOLEAN DEFAULT true
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP

TABLE programs
  id BIGINT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT
  name VARCHAR(100) NOT NULL
  code VARCHAR(10) UNIQUE NOT NULL
  degree_type ENUM('bachelor', 'master', 'doctorate', 'certificate')
  department_id BIGINT NOT NULL FK
  coordinator_id BIGINT FK
  duration_years TINYINT NOT NULL
  required_credits INT NOT NULL
  description TEXT
  admission_requirements TEXT
  career_prospects TEXT
  tuition_per_credit DECIMAL(8,2)
  is_active BOOLEAN DEFAULT true
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP

TABLE courses
  id BIGINT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT
  code VARCHAR(20) UNIQUE NOT NULL
  title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
  description TEXT
  department_id BIGINT NOT NULL FK
  credit_hours TINYINT NOT NULL
  lecture_hours TINYINT DEFAULT 0
  lab_hours TINYINT DEFAULT 0
  prerequisites TEXT
  learning_outcomes TEXT
  syllabus_url VARCHAR(500)
  is_active BOOLEAN DEFAULT true
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP

TABLE course_sections
  id BIGINT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT
  course_id BIGINT NOT NULL FK
  section_number VARCHAR(10) NOT NULL
  semester ENUM('fall', 'spring', 'summer')
  year YEAR NOT NULL
  instructor_id BIGINT NOT NULL FK
  max_enrollment INT NOT NULL
  current_enrollment INT DEFAULT 0
  classroom VARCHAR(50)
  meeting_days VARCHAR(20)
  start_time TIME
  end_time TIME
  start_date DATE
  end_date DATE
  status ENUM('scheduled', 'active', 'completed', 'cancelled') DEFAULT 'scheduled'
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP

TABLE enrollments
  id BIGINT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT
  student_id BIGINT NOT NULL FK
  section_id BIGINT NOT NULL FK
  enrollment_date DATE NOT NULL
  drop_date DATE
  grade VARCHAR(5)
  grade_points DECIMAL(3,2)
  attendance_percentage DECIMAL(5,2)
  status ENUM('enrolled', 'dropped', 'completed', 'withdrawn') DEFAULT 'enrolled'
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP

TABLE assignments
  id BIGINT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT
  section_id BIGINT NOT NULL FK
  title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
  description TEXT
  type ENUM('homework', 'quiz', 'exam', 'project', 'presentation')
  total_points INT NOT NULL
  due_date DATETIME NOT NULL
  submission_method ENUM('online', 'paper', 'presentation')
  instructions TEXT
  rubric_url VARCHAR(500)
  is_group_assignment BOOLEAN DEFAULT false
  late_penalty_per_day DECIMAL(5,2) DEFAULT 0.00
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP

TABLE submissions
  id BIGINT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT
  assignment_id BIGINT NOT NULL FK
  student_id BIGINT NOT NULL FK
  submission_date DATETIME NOT NULL
  file_url VARCHAR(500)
  content TEXT
  points_earned DECIMAL(6,2)
  feedback TEXT
  grade VARCHAR(5)
  is_late BOOLEAN DEFAULT false
  late_days INT DEFAULT 0
  status ENUM('submitted', 'graded', 'returned') DEFAULT 'submitted'
  graded_by BIGINT FK
  graded_at TIMESTAMP
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP

TABLE program_courses
  id BIGINT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT
  program_id BIGINT NOT NULL FK
  course_id BIGINT NOT NULL FK
  requirement_type ENUM('required', 'elective', 'prerequisite')
  year_level TINYINT
  semester_recommended ENUM('fall', 'spring', 'summer', 'any')
  sort_order INT DEFAULT 0
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP

TABLE student_advisors
  id BIGINT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT
  student_id BIGINT NOT NULL FK
  advisor_id BIGINT NOT NULL FK
  assigned_date DATE NOT NULL
  end_date DATE
  is_primary BOOLEAN DEFAULT true
  notes TEXT
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP

RELATIONSHIPS
students.major_id -> programs.id
students.advisor_id -> faculty.id
faculty.department_id -> departments.id
departments.head_id -> faculty.id
departments.college_id -> colleges.id
colleges.dean_id -> faculty.id
programs.department_id -> departments.id
programs.coordinator_id -> faculty.id
courses.department_id -> departments.id
course_sections.course_id -> courses.id
course_sections.instructor_id -> faculty.id
enrollments.student_id -> students.id
enrollments.section_id -> course_sections.id
assignments.section_id -> course_sections.id
submissions.assignment_id -> assignments.id
submissions.student_id -> students.id
submissions.graded_by -> faculty.id
program_courses.program_id -> programs.id
program_courses.course_id -> courses.id
student_advisors.student_id -> students.id
student_advisors.advisor_id -> faculty.id